# An Analysis of the Path of Exile League Economy

The economy in Path of Exile does not work as one would expect from a normal MMO. In most MMOs one would kill monsters and expect some sort of monetary reward like gold. In Path of Exile however, killing monsters rewards players with a variety of orbs which serves as the currency. The biggest difference compared to traditional game currency systems is that each of these orbs are not only currency, but double as a usable item which can be used to have an effect on items, for example: Chaos orbs which removes all the stats on an item and rerolls completely new stat values and properties. The inherent value in these currencies comes from how they are essentially used to gamble on items, with players trying to use them in order to try and upgrade their items to be stronger. However conversely, players can also just save up currency and buy a better item off of another player. 
The second main difference in Path of Exiles economy is the existence of Leagues. Roughly every 3 months the game receives a major patch which introduces new mechanics, items, and content but also wipes out all existing characters and items from the previous league. This gives the economy of the game a fresh start every 3 months, which allows us to track trends in the valuation of currency across leagues. While the prices of relative price of currency items tends to stabilize as each league progresses, the first month’s economy is incredibly volatile, and a lot of money can be made by understanding the demand for currency items and correctly playing the market. The main cause in the fluctuation in demand for specific currency items is that, for the most part, people do not wish to use their big ticket currency items like Exalted or Divine Orbs when the league is first starting, because most of their items are not rare or strong enough to warrant wasting such rare currency. Therefore, in the beginning of the league the prices of these currency items tends to be quite low, and therefore those who are trying to play the market for the long run can buy up these items and then resell once they stabilize to a higher price.
Another thing to note is that in PoE, people tend to pay for convenience. Unlike most	games, there is not actual in-game designated marketplace. People have to search up on a 3rd party website, for what they want, then message the player for it, and then go to their “hideout” to trade with them. This makes it so that people who want to buy bulk amounts of items, tend to pay a premium to spare them the inconvenience of having to go out of their way to complete multiple trades with different people. An example of this would be that if you wanted to buy 1000 pencils online and there were only 2 listings in existence. The first is that you could buy all 1000 pencils in 1 transaction for $1000, or you could buy 1 pencil at a time for $0.95. While some people would be ok with wasting time clicking 1000 times, a lot of people would just pay the extra $50 to spare them the pain. 
It is these interesting circumstances that makes the economy of Path of Exile an incredibly interesting thing to truly understand, as its markets differ so greatly from not only that of the real world, but that of other games.

> hello
